+++
title = "Grand challenges of neuroscience"
draft = true
date = '17 Jan 2025'
summary = "Pondering open challenges and the tools required to meet them"
+++

In the same vein as [Hamming's You and Your Research](https://www.cs.virginia.edu/~robins/YouAndYourResearch.html "research"), I want to articulate for myself what are the most important problems in the field of neuroscience today and whether we have a line of attack on those problems. I also want to try and work backwards from these challenges to understand whether we have the right tools to overcome these challenges and if not, what improvements might we make / new tools might we invent to get there. I write this post after having read the wonderful papers by [*Adam Marblestone et al.*  on *Physical principles for scalable neural recording*](https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/computational-neuroscience/articles/10.3389/fncom.2013.00137/full) and Ed Boyden on [Tools for analysing, repairing and simulating the brain](https://synthneuro.org/publications/tools-for-analyzing-repairing-and-simulating-the-brain/). Credit must also be given to Milan Cvitkovic's list – [Goals of neurotechnology](https://milan.cvitkovic.net/writing/the_goals_of_neurotechnology/), which has a more comprehensive listing of outcomes than I could have thought of myself. The end goals listed there are very much what one could think of as mass market applications but little is said about the suite of technologies that might enable those and developing underlying tools to progress on those applications are very likely to be important challenges in themselves. In fact, it seems probable that we might already have a basis set of technology that is required to fundamentally understand the brain across its various temporal and spatial scales but work needs to be done to find the important combinations and progress them towards wide scale adoption – even if just for research use in willing humans. 

I also want to use this essay as a means to discuss some technologies – x-ray, photoacoustic spectroscopy, molecular recording and magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS/NMR) – in greater depth as I have heard relatively little about them compared to the usual stars – all manners of multi-electrode arrays, conventional non-invasive brain stimulation (ultrasound, temporal interference, transcranial direct current stimulation, transcranial magnetic stimulation), biohybrid devices, organoids, functional near infrared spectroscopy, conventional magnetic resonance imaging, magnetoencephalography and electroencephalography. I want to try and understand whether a part of the substantial effort devoted to improving them might instead be applied elsewhere to achieve significantly more understanding. Finally, I want to put my intuition to test here. My intuition currently suggests that there is something missing from the technology landscape (combinatorially, not in fundamental building blocks) but it seems that all the work right now is very much focussed on conventional attributes – can we inhibit the neurons and can we make them fire at will? It is hoped and perhaps rightly so, that electronics is all that there is to it. Or maybe that's the lowest hanging fruit. I do not know yet. I hope to be better informed by the end of this essay. Certainly, I am fundamentally uncomfortable with the idea that only because we can observe electrical/haemodynamic signals with the most ease means that that is all there is to it, for recording or manipulating. My discomfort stems from not knowing how these explain the memory retrieval process (where is the retrieval happening from? How is that memory stored and how is it brought to fore so quickly when recalled? What is the neurobiological basis of recall? Why can we not manipulate it more concretely - sure we are able to augment it by focussed ultrasound, temporal interference or tDCS supposedly but how is Alzheimer's able to remove memory almost selectively yet we aren't? Or why can't we selectively remember in great depth - for instance, if I had a device that sees and hears the scene around me, how can it impart it to my brain by sheer modulation? What does it need to modulate, how does it verify the storage?). My discomfort stems from not knowing how we can reduce the need for sleep to the same extent as super sleepers? How is learning represented across the time and spatial scales of the brain and the rest of the body - how can I learn a knitting pattern just by seeing it? How are we able to translate with practically no latency loss if someone grows up bilingual or trilingual? Or how do psychedelics function?

Now consider the idea as to why is our understanding of memory, sleep or learning - languages, other skills - incomplete and very poorly perturbable. If we truly understood the causal factors, we could modify them by building technology that intervenes in them. It is already pretty clear that we now have technology that intervenes at all length and spatial scales, just not at the same time or within the same modality. 

<!-- This is not a heretical view by any means, in fact this is pretty close to the mainstream and evident in the work of organisations such as E11 Bio and the Human Brain Project. Our ability to identify all the constituent elements of brain, their far reaching connections and then their activation patterns will certainly lead to many fundamental insights. However, a key limitation with the core technique (self-reporting expansion microscopy) is its inability to work in living organisms [reference to ed boyden's paper]. The current way around that is to use peptide based reporters that respond to local concentrations of neurotransmitters. How does one trace a line from understanding neurotransmitter gradients in mice or certain animals to how they influence our proce -->

Without further ado, here are, very arbitrarily introduced, the list of challenges which I think provide provide the most interesting overall bearings and whose single-minded pursuit might yield fundamentally more interesting technology than what we are focussing on right now.

1. Neurological diseases 
2. How are memories formed and stored physically?
3. How is subjective experience formed? How do we process an emotion?
4. How can we stop the brain from aging?
5. How can we regenerate / restore damaged areas of the brain?
6. How can we accelerate or obviate the need for sleep?
7. How can we collectively understand the neural system across the body rather than in isolation in the brain / spine / gut?
8. What is the neural mechanism of learning? How do we create an abstraction of skill hierarchy?
9. How does our brain imagine? (which, if I remember right, was Demis Hassabis' PhD thesis topic)
10. How do cognitive biases take root?
11. How does the brain translate languages?

<!-- Seems I am not the only one exploring the need to accelerate or obviate sleep, [Minjune Song has also been interested in exploring this](http://minjunes.ai/posts/sleep/index.html) -->

<!-- I am going to pause on this post as I have 23 days to the next deadline and this needs a more systematic way of progressing to identify the gaps. -->



